Glass viscosity calculation based on a global
statistical modelling approach
Alexander Fluegel1
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington, USA
Date received 17 July 2006
Revision received 14 February 2007
Accepted 17 February 2007
A viscosity model for predicting the complete viscosity curve of glass was developed using a global statistical approach
and more than 2200 composition–viscosity data for silicate glasses collected from over 50 years of scientific literature,
including soda–lime–silica container and float glasses, TV panel glasses, borosilicate fibre wool and E type glasses, low
expansion borosilicate glasses, glasses for nuclear waste vitrification, lead crystal glasses, binary alkali silicates, and
various other compositions. It is shown that, within a measurement series from a specific laboratory, the reported viscosity
values are commonly overestimated at higher temperatures due to evaporation losses during the measurement and glass
preparation; this includes data presented by Lakatos et al (1972) and the recent ‘High temperature glass melt property
database for process modelling’ by published by Seward et al (2005). Similarly, in the glass transition range many ex-
perimental data reported for borosilicate glasses are too high due to phase separation effects. The global model developed
here corrects those errors. The model standard error was 9–17°C, with R2=0·985–0·989. The prediction confidence interval
in mass production largely depends on the glass composition of interest, the composition uncertainty, and the viscosity
level. The mixed alkali effect for the viscosity is derived from nonlinear alkali–silica interactions in binary systems.


1. Introduction
The objective of this paper is to develop an accurate
glass viscosity model relevant to commercial appli-
cation through statistical analysis and based on all
composition–property data available in SciGlass.(1)
The source data in SciGlass originate from numerous
scientific and technical publications from several
decades of research that do not always agree. The
goal in this study is to evaluate and correct systematic
differences between data from specific investiga-
tors, thereby making comparable a large number of
data series and previous viscosity models, creating
a broadly founded accuracy, and increasing the
reliability of viscosity predictions. A detailed error
calculation, sensitive to the glass composition of
interest, is intended to provide a dependable viscosity
prediction confidence interval for estimating process
tolerances in the industry.
Viscosity, η, is probably the most important
property in glass making; it strongly influences the
melting and fining conditions in glass furnaces, which
are correlated with the furnace energy consumption.
During glass forming processes the viscosity must be
tightly controlled to maintain a high product qual-
ity. The tempera­tures throughout the glass cooling
schedule are dictated by the viscosity.

Systematic studies of the viscosity–temperature
relation in glasses were initiated by Vogel,(2) Fulcher(3)
and Tammann et al,(4) and resulted in the now widely
accepted Vogel–Fulcher–Tammann (VFT) Equation:
log(η)=A+B/(T−To)
(1)
The viscosity depends on the chemical glass com-
position as well as temperature. As early as the 1920s,
English(5) and Gehlhoff et al(6) were engaged in studies
of soda–lime–silica glasses to establish the sensitivity
of viscosity to compositional changes.
It would be very convenient to be able to calculate
viscosity and its variation with temperature from the
chemical composition of a glass. Numerous publica-
tions are devoted to this topic,(7–33) and have been
summarised by Scholze,(34) Volf(35) and Martlew;(36) the
data from such publications have recently been in-
corporated in the SciGlass information system.(1) The
programs SciGlass(1) and Interglad(37) are equipped
with an automated simple linear multiple regression
feature for the glass properties they contain. Among
the mentioned models, probably most widely used
at present are the empirical approaches of Lakatos
et al(7) (soda–lime–silica, borosilicate fibre, lead crys-
tal), and Fluegel et al(32) (soda–lime–silica, TV panel,
borosilicate fibre wool and E type, low expansion
borosilicate).
Viscosity models that are not based on the directly
empirical method,2 such as the thermodynamic approach of Conradt,(22) are not intended to provide
accurate predictions in the first place, but to dem-
onstrate property relations. Therefore, the accuracy
of the directly empirical viscosity models described
in this paper cannot be compared to non-empirical
models. The directly empirical method allows the
highest accuracy, considering the limits of validity
for the model.
For direct empirical modelling most investigators
use their own viscosity measurements as the sole data
source; sometimes findings from another investigator
who is in good agreement are also considered, such
as in the models by Öksoy et al(23) and Fluegel et al(32)
This approach has the advantage that the models
obtained describe the source data very well. However,
important issues remain unresolved.
Experimental viscosity data from various labora-
tories can differ by 50°C or more, even within simple
glass systems as shown in Figure 1. (Figure 1 also
shows model predictions based on the present work
for later discussion.) Naturally, disagreements in the
data for commercial multicomponent glasses may be
substantially larger than for simple binary glasses;
however, most experimental data for multicompo-
nent glasses are not directly comparable because of
differences in the compositions studied.
As a result of the disagreements between experi-
mental data from different labora­tories, the models
derived from those data are also in conflict.(34) For
example, predictions from several models of the


glass melting point in °C at a viscosity of 10 Pa s (100
Poise) for the compositions given in Table 1 are listed
in Table 2. All glasses in Table 1 are standards, where
the viscosity (but not the composition except for DGG
I) has been verified by several laboratories, excluding
the soda–lime–silica container glass ‘CO.’ CO is listed
because of its simple composition, which is covered
by most viscosity models. The experimental results
are also shown in Table 2 for comparison.
The few direct empirical viscosity models, that
consider papers by several investigators as data
sources, were published by Bottinga et al,(15) Lyon(14)
and Fluegel et al.(31) However, in these three papers
only a small fraction of the available viscosity data
currently available are considered, and the statistical
modelling procedure used is not developed in detail.
The viscosity model of Priven(1,28) is derived from all
data available in the literature for unary, binary, and
ternary glass systems, and uses multicomponent
glasses for verification purposes only. The advantage
of Priven’s model lies in its practically unlimited ap-
plication;3 however, it sacrifices accuracy in detail.
The automated simple linear multiple regression
features in the databases SciGlass(1) and Interglad(37)
are not comparable to a careful statistical analysis
carried out by an expert.
No viscosity model known to the author quanti-
fies precisely the error in the predictions for the glass
composition of interest, considering the results of
many investigators. The prediction errors of models
based on data from one single laboratory are not neces-
sarily valid for other laboratories.(32) In the models of
Bottinga et al,(15) Lyon,(14) Priven(28) and Fluegel et al(31)
some overall errors are reported, but prediction errors
valid for a specific composition are not given.
Systematic differences between viscosity data from
different publications have not been investigated,
except in earlier papers by the author.(31,32)
Most viscosity models use the additivity method
wherein the predictions change linearly with the
concentrations of the glass components. While this is
a good approach within limited composition ranges,
it cannot be applied to different glass families simul-
taneously (such as soda–lime–silica and borosilicate),
and therefore, data based on this approach are not
comparable over wide composition areas.
2. Statistical data analysis
The source data and all references used in this work
are given in the SciGlass database.(1) References for
the larger or otherwise important data series are
displayed in Tables 1 and 8–11. All glass compositions
were converted to mol%. The concentrations of some
transition metals in varying oxidation states were
added up to the most common oxidation state. Table
3 lists some constraints imposed during modelling,
although the large number of component combina-
tion constraints cannot be listed here due to space
limitations. All limits are given in detail in Ref. 45.
The glass water content varied between 80–642 ppm
by weight.(46) The original viscosity data were used
to interpolate temperatures of constant viscosity
(isokom) at log10(η/(Pa s))=1·5, 6·6 (~Littleton Soften-
ing Point for soda–lime–silica glasses), and 12·0
(close to Tg). The glass compositions in mol% were
employed as independent variables for modelling,
while the isokom temperatures were chosen as model
responses. This approach has the advantage that no
assumption is made about the temperature–viscosity
curve, as opposed to models describing the VFT(7,23)
or Arrhenius parameters.(25,33)
Ideally, it would be desirable not to limit the analy-
sis to only three viscosity levels, as has been done
here following the tradition by Lakatos et al (Glass
Technol., 1972),(7) but to include several more with one
for each decimal power, e.g. log10(η/(Pa s))=0, 1, 2, 3, …
12. This would provide a very valuable insight about
the validity of common temperature–viscosity equa-
tions, such as Equation (1), over wide temperature
ranges. It is planned to perform this analysis in a
forthcoming publication however, because the study
of three viscosity levels already gives much material
for discussion, it is worthwhile to publish it now. For
now, the reader is advised to estimate the viscosity
levels not discussed here by application of Equation
(1). Such estimation is very applicable to commercial
glasses (based on earlier studies by the author,(32) and
on the work of Lakatos et al (Glass Technol., 1972),(7)
who centred his model on log10(η/(Pa s))=1·5, 6·5, and
11·5). However, very precise measurements below
common error limits reveal that the VFT Equation (1)
may not be followed exactly; deviations of up to 4°C
have been observed for the glass DGG I.(43)
Details of the statistical data analysis procedure are
described elsewhere.(32,47–48) The equation for viscosity
predictions is
Isokom temperature = b_0 + \sum_{i=1}^{n} \left[ b_i C_i + \sum_{k=i}^{n} \left( b_{ik} C_i C_k + \sum_{m=k}^{n} b_{ikm} C_i C_k C_m \right) \right]    (2)


where the isokom temperatures are expressed in °C,
the b-values are the model coefficients in Tables 4–6,
the C-values are the glass component concentrations
in mol% excluding silica, and n is the total number
of glass components excluding silica.
The equations for calculating the confidence inter-
val of the viscosity isokom predictions, considering
the uncertainty of the glass composition of interest,
have been described in earlier publications.(32,47–48) It
must be noted, that all viscosity and error calculations
in this work can be performed conveniently using a
computer program connected to this study.(45)
3. The global viscosity model
Tables 4–6 list all coefficients and corresponding t-
values for the global viscosity model. The standard
error in a coefficient is given by the coefficient divided
by its t-value. Coefficients not shown in Tables 4–6
have an insignificant influence(32,47–48) on the viscosity.
In Table 7 goodness-of-fit and other related indica-
tors(32,47–48) are displayed, and Tables 8–10 show the
data-series that were systematically corrected in the
model by constant offsets. The properties of large
data-series are provided in Table 11. The correlation
and inverse information matrices are given in Ref. 45.
Residuals, e.g. in Table 7, are defined as the differ-
ences between observed and calculated values.
4. Discussion
4.1. Phase separation in the glass softening
range
Multiple regression modelling using polynomial
functions (Equation (2)) described the viscosity data
well for most silicate glasses studied. At the vis-
cosity level log(η/(Pa s))=6·6 (~Littleton Softening
Point), however, the borosilicate standard 717A(40)
appeared as an outlier in the initial modelling stud-
ies. Initially, the predicted Littleton Softening Point
was significantly higher than the value of 719°C
given in the certificate.(40) Such unusual behaviour
was not observed for any other of the six standards
listed in Tables 1 and 12 at any viscosity level. It was
concluded that either the standard or the mean of
all other borosilicate data must be questionable. In
this work it was decided to rely on the borosilicate
standard 717A because it was carefully prepared and
measured in several laboratories as described in the
certificate;(40) phase separation was assumed to be
absent. Concerning other glasses phase separation
effects were considered as explained below. In addi-
tion, it was observed that some experimental data in
the literature do not appear to be reliable. For exam-
ple, rather doubtful borosilicate viscosity curves are
reported by Akimov,(73) such as the one depicted in
Figure 2. All data reported by Akimov were excluded
from the calculations in this study.
The main reason why the standard 717A did not
fit into initial models at log(η/(Pa s))=6·6 is the influ-
ence of phase separation(74) on the viscosity. Figure 3
shows a viscosity curve of a borosilicate glass that has
a strong tendency to phase separate below 753·5°C. At
low temperatures the viscosity is much higher than it
would be expected from high temperature data due
to the formation of a continuous silica-rich phase(75)
during cooling. Many common borosilicate glasses
have a tendency towards phase separation with a
continuous silica-rich phase. This tendency is not as
strong as the example in Figure 3, however, because
of inhibition by Al2O3, K2O, and other components
such as those found in standard 717A. In commercial
glasses, phase separation is also prevented kinetically
through sufficiently high cooling rates.(76, p 92) Figure
4 depicts the metastable immiscibility curve in the
system SiO2–Na2O–B2O3.
Phase separation in common borosilicates occurs
in the glass softening range,(74–76) while at high tem-
peratures the separated phases dissolve mutually,
and at low temperatures in the glass annealing range
it is inhibited kinetically or thermo­dynamically.(78)
Borosilicate glasses that are cooled sufficiently quick-
ly are homogeneous at low and high temperatures,
while during viscosity measurement in the softening
range, phase separation takes place and the viscosity
increases.
Hence, in this work the borosilicate standard
717A was introduced in the model at log(η/(Pa s))=6·6
with a tenfold weight compared to all other glasses,
thereby mitigating the influence of phase separation
in other borosilicates. It can be concluded that soften-
ing range viscosity data of borosilicate glasses should
be published carefully, only after examining the phase
separation tendency through prolonged viscosity
measurements under isothermal conditions, light
scattering experiments, or similar measures.
4.2. Evaporation loss during melting
It is a curious property of the viscosity models in this
study that most data series show a trend, as depicted
in Figure 5, that to the best of the author’s knowledge
cannot simply be traced back to a linear influence
of any published glass component or component
combination. The data series in Figure 5 from Lakatos
et al,(7) Hrma et al,(38) and the Owens-Illinois Com-
pany(67) are important because glass engineers and
scientist frequently use them for viscosity modelling.
Trends similar to those in Figure 5 are not limited to
soda–lime–silica glasses, but also can be observed in
other glass families such as most borosilicates, TV
panel compositions, and lead silicates. The average
of all residual trends of individual data series in this
work is 0·09, i.e. in a series spanning over 200°C the
residuals increase 18°C in going from low to high
temperature isokoms. The residual trend of all data
series combined in the three models of this study
is insignificant, the trends apply to the individual
series only.
Residual trends, as seen in Figure 5, also appear if
all coefficients representing component interactions
and offsets in the tables are excluded, according
to the well known linear additivity principle,(1,34–37)
The trends are also present in very simple viscosity
models, such as that given by considering all binary
SiO2–Na2O glasses in SciGlass,(1) or sometimes even in
viscosity additivity models for one single series, e.g.
the soda–lime–silica container glasses in the ‘High
temperature glass melt property database’.(38,65–66)
It can be stated that residual trends as observed in
Figure 5 are not caused by the statistical analysis.
Naturally, residual trends in models developed from
only one data series are often relatively insignificant
because the trends are interpreted as compositional
effects. Therefore, the errors of such local models
sometimes appear small, which may not necessarily
reflect the reality.
The residual trends cannot be reduced to a viscos-
ity curve that does not follow the VFT Equation (1) or
non-Newtonian viscous flow because the calculations
in this work are not based on any such assumptions.
It also cannot be concluded that thermocouple or
viscometer calibrations are systematically incorrect,
as such influences cannot be detected in the viscosity
models presented here. Furthermore, it is not pos-
sible to link the trends to changing glass chemistry
with increasing temperature because this effect is
accounted for already, evidenced by the fact that no
overall trends can be observed in the models; the
trends appear only in individual series. Instead, an
attempt was made to investigate the relation between
alkali and boron oxide evaporation and the residual
trends. To achieve this an additional variable was
introduced into the models representing the product
of the isokom temperature in °C and the sum of the
volatile oxide concentrations in mol% of Na2O, K2O
and B2O3. If the product is high, alkali and boron
oxide evaporation can be expected to be more signifi-
cant. Possible evaporation losses of SO3, F, NaCl, H2O,
ZnO, and PbO were not taken into account.
It turned out that through consideration of
evaporation with a single variable the standard
model errors as seen in Table 7 can be reduced by
about 15%. The fact that the evaporation variable
is so significant at all of the three viscosity levels
shows that evaporation mainly takes place during
the glass melting process. Also quenching of the melt
in water as practiced by Lakatos et al(7) reduces the
alkali and boron oxide content. Meerlender(43) reports
a relatively insignificant viscosity isokom increase
of 1°C at 700°C if the completely melted standard
DGG I (soda–lime–silica glass) is heat treated for 15
h at 1300–1400°C or for 20 h at 1200–1300°C under
otherwise unknown conditions. The evaporation
loss during glass melting is more significant than
after completion of the melting process because of
the high surface area of the batch and gas and water
evolution. Boron oxide readily evaporates in wet
furnace atmospheres.(79) In addition, the ‘loss on igni-
tion,’ used to quantify surface adsorbed water in the
batch materials, is not always evaluated in literature
data. However, the reported chemical analysis of the
glass compositions in some large data series(7,38,49,65–67)
theoretically should account for evaporation losses,
especially if the chemical analysis was performed
not before(38,65–66) but after high-temperature viscosity
measurements.(7) This work did not detect that the
chemical analysis has an influence on the composi-
tion–viscosity relation because an accurate chemical
analysis of multicomponent silicate glasses is more
difficult than viscosity measurements. For verifica-
tion, the batched and analysed compositions of
hundreds of borosilicate glasses for nuclear waste
vitrification.(25,71) were compared. It turned out that
the average error (standard deviation of differences
between batched and analysed concentrations) of the
Na2O concentrations for 687 waste glasses containing
an average of 13·4 wt% Na2O was 10·2% of the total
Na2O content, with an evaporation loss of 3·2% of the
total Na2O content. Concerning B2O3 the error was
8·0% of the total B2O3 content of 9·6 wt%, with an
evaporation loss of 0·7% of the total B2O3 content.
As seen in the aforementioned example, evapora-
tion losses during glass melting are difficult to detect
by chemical analysis. According to gravimetric inves-
tigations by the author on simplified compositions an
evaporative loss of about 3% of the total Na2O content
is reasonable in laboratory experiments. Assuming
evaporative losses similar to those seen with waste
glasses, viscosity isokom temperatures for an average
composition in this work would increase by about 9°C
at log(η/(Pa s))=1·5, 4°C at log(η/(Pa s))=6·6, and 2°C
at log(η/(Pa s))=12·0, which is not sufficient to fully
account for the observed residual trends.
The introduction of an evaporation variable for
Na2O, K2O, and B2O3 reduces the residual trends
such as those seen in Figure 5, but it does not remove
them. Either there exist other factors that influence the
composition–viscosity relation at high temperatures
within the measure­ment series, or the evaporative
loss was not represented correctly by the simple
variable employed in this study. Evaporation does
not increase linearly with temperature as assumed
for simplicity here, but exponentially. Furthermore,
it is possible that the different batch materials used
in each of the various studies have slightly different
compositions which are difficult to analyse in the re-
sulting glass, for example they may contain differing
amounts of physically adsorbed water. In laboratory
experiments of the author often the melted glass is
about 1 wt% lighter than the batch composition sug-
gests, even considering Na2O and B2O3 evaporation.
Varying water content in the batch materials would
result in a different water contents in the resulting
glasses; the water content would be expected to
decrease with increasing melting temperature and
time. Also the melting conditions, for example is
the melting atmosphere wet or dry, can have similar
influences on the glass composition.
In this paper, variables taking into account evapo-
ration and the water content were not introduced in
the final model versions presented in Tables 4–6 be-
cause further experimental investigations and mod-
elling work are recommended first. It is suggested
that glasses with high viscosity, high concentrations
of volatile com­pounds, and based on this work high
residuals, should be studied. In addition, a statistical
analysis dedicated to the glass water content should
be performed, if possible, augmented by selected
experiments. Through a few verification experiments
the prediction errors of the model could be reduced
significantly.
The residual trends are part of the cause (besides
component interactions) of viscosity models based
on a single data series being poor at predicting the
viscosities for other data series, especially if the
glasses in the other series include another area of
temperature-viscosity behaviour.
4.3. Model accuracy
Besides the phase separation effects mentioned
above, glasses within specific composition areas
were not identified as outlier suspects; i.e. sharp
composition–viscosity trends did not seem to exist
that could not be described through polynomial
functions. The glass composition–viscosity relation
appears to show a smooth behaviour. Further phase
separation or crystallisation effects did not occur. It
is possible that sharp composition–viscosity trends
within the limits of validity of the model described
in this work(45) might be discovered in future.
This study enables predictions of the viscosity iso-
koms temperatures of silicate glasses with a standard
error of 9–17°C based on over 100 references given
in SciGlass(1) and the Tables 1, and 8–11. The degrees
of freedom(32,47–48) in Table 7 are very close to the total
number of the analysed data. There are about 15 times
more data in the models than variables, which makes
them equivalent to a one-variable linear regression
using 15 data points. With one exception the models
do not contain data points with high leverage(32,47–48)
as demonstrated by R2 (predicted) and R2 (valida-
tion) in Table 7. One experimental value of a binary
potassium silicate glass (30 mol% K2O(80)) with high
leverage and large residual was force fitted into the
model at log(η/(Pa s))=6·6 because the data point
appeared reasonable compared to other data in the
composition area based on knowledge of the subject
matter.
The similarity between R2 and R2(adjusted) in Table
8 shows that the models are not over-fitted with too
many variables.
The experimental errors derived from fitting all
the data for binary alkali silicate glasses listed in
SciGlass(1) are close to the standard model errors in
Table 7, which is an indicator that the model is not
over- or under-fitted. The model appears to have the
same accuracy as the experimental measurements.
A comparison of hundreds of experimental data
with the model predictions from this work is given
in Table 11. It is not surprising that the majority of
the experimental data agree well with the model be-
cause the model is based directly on the experimental
findings, without intermediate assumptions about
the glass structure (formation of chemical equilibria
between structural groups) or property relations (be-
tween viscosity and heat capacity, Gibbs free energy
difference of devitrification, enthalpy of melting, ther-
mal expansion, liquidus temperature, surface tension,
molar volume, shear modulus, cooling rate), such
as in the models by Conradt(22) or Priven.(28) On the
contrary, structural group formations and property
relations can be recognised to their full extent only
after a statistical analysis of the available data, such
an analysis has been initiated in this study.
The advantage of the empirical modelling ap-
proach is its high accuracy, when the limits of validity
of the model are considered.
Numerous viscosity models due to other authors
exist.(7–33) The global model developed in this study
is more versatile and accurate than previous works,
as demonstrated in Table 2. This is caused by the fact
that the source data of most previous models plus
additional published values were combined in this
paper through advanced statistical analysis. Outside
the limits of validity of this study,(45) other models can
be used.(22,28–29)
An experimental model validation would be supe-
rior to the data splitting and R2 (predicted) calculation
procedures used in this work. At present, it is not
possible to compare model predictions to findings
of other investigators because the model includes
all of them. Further experimental investigations are
required.
The data series in Tables 8–10 do not compare well
to findings of other investigators. The offsets of those
series are assumed to indicate systematic measure-
ment errors that had to be corrected mathematically
in this work. The error in the series by Allison et al(49)
has been reported previously.(31) Some systematic
errors such as those in the work of Eipeltauer et al(51)
can be confirmed by analysing data in binary glass
systems only. The correlation matrices(45) indicate that
the systematic offsets of the series in Tables 8–10 are
not strongly correlated with other model variables,
which means that the offsets cannot be explained
by unique glass composition regions investigated
in those series. However, weak correlations remain.
Further experimental investigations can help improv-
ing the accuracy of the systematic offsets.
Data series without systematic offsets in Tables
8–10 and with a low standard deviation, σ, of the
residuals in Table 11 were regarded as being of high
quality (high precision), for example the series re-
ported by the Owens-Illinois Company(67) or Lakatos
et al.(7) The incorporation of those data series in this
study decreases the error of the model and makes
high accuracy predictions possible. In contrast, series
with high σ of the residuals increase the error.
It cannot be claimed that all the composition-
viscosity trends found in Tables 4–6 or rejected as
insignificant are of the same accuracy. However,
within the limits of validity of the model(45) all com-
position–viscosity trends fall within the confidence
interval for the predictions.(45)
The certified values of six viscosity standards agree
well with the predictions of the model listed in Table
12. It needs to be considered that not all viscosity
levels and chemical compositions of the standards
are certified.
Based on all of the statements above it is claimed
that the viscosity models in Table 4–6 are accurate,
including error calculations derived from the inverse
information matrix(48) in Ref. 45. Viscosity isokom
temperatures values of glasses that fall into the ap-
plication ranges of this work given in Ref. 45, and
with a residual larger than three times the model
standard errors in Table 7 might be questionable.
Previously published viscosity models cannot claim
the same level of accuracy as this study because
they are based on experimental data from only one
or a few selected laboratories as explained in the
introduction, and therefore are missing systematic
inter-laboratory comparison.
4.4.Influence of the glass composition on the
viscosity
All single component coefficients bi from Equation
(2) in the Tables 4–6 have the unit °C/mol%, and they
quantify the viscosity isokom variation caused by the
exchange of 1 mol% SiO2 by 1 mol% of the considered
component. For example, if 1 mol% fluoride ions are
introduced into a silicate glass in exchange for 1 mol%
SiO2, the temperature of constant viscosity (isokom)
at log(η/(Pa s))=1·5 decreases by 11·7°C, while at
higher viscosities the isokom temperature decreases
by 9·3 and 8·1°C, respectively.
Because the main component SiO2 was excluded
from the calculation following the slack variable
modelling approach,(32,47–48) all coefficients represent
interactions with SiO2.
For an accurate interpretation of model coeffi-
cients, the correlation matrices given in Ref. 45 must
be considered. Unfortunately, none of the variables
are absolutely statistically independent; i.e. all vari-
ables interfere more or less mutually. It is believed
that in the immediate future, it will not be possible
to decorrelate all variables completely because this
would require a high number of well planned and
very accurate measurements. Therefore, it is recom-
mended to consider the model coefficients in this pa-
per as preliminary findings until further experimental
data become available. Nevertheless, as long as all
validity limits summarised in Ref. 45 are followed,
accurate predictions are possible.
Because of mutual correlations, it is suggested that
the predictions of the model are compared rather
than coefficient values to evaluate the influences
of various glass components on the viscosity for a
specific practical application, such as in the examples
in Figures 1, 6 to 14, and 16.
The model constants bo in Tables 4–6 theoretically
are supposed to represent the viscosity isokom tem-
peratures of glasses comprising mainly SiO2, and all
components with insignificant influence on the vis-
cosity such as H2O, some fining and colouring agents,
and impurities. However, few experimental data exist
for high silica glasses, and the models in this paper
are not applicable to those composition areas.
Influences of the glass composition on the viscosity
can be extracted from Tables 4–6. General trends are
discussed in other publications.(31–32,34 (p 128,156)) Figures
6 to 12 display spider graphs calculated using the
model for approximate average compositions at
the investigated viscosity levels. In Figure 6 at high
temperature the composition–viscosity functions
(excluding the one for B2O3) appear to be rather
linear, while at lower temperatures in Figures 9 and
11 more curvature is observed. It can be concluded
that the component interactions, which cause de-
viations from additive linear composition–property
relations, are especially strong at low temperatures.
At high temperatures thermal dissociation reduces
many interactions. Another common tendency is that
most glass components decrease the viscosity at high
temperatures, while at low temperatures significantly
fewer components have a viscosity lowering effect.
4.4.1. Silica
SiO2 always increases the viscosity in common silicate
glasses, especially at high temperatures. At low tem-
peratures other components can increase the viscosity
more than silica as seen in Figures 11 and 12.
4.4.2. Boron oxide
B2O3 strongly decreases the viscosity at high tem-
peratures, while at low temperatures this influence
is reversed. The coefficients in Tables 4–6 assume that
boron oxide on its own always decreases the viscosity,
however, in interaction with sodium oxide a strong
viscosity increase occurs, which is a manifestation of
the boron oxide anomaly.(34(p138),76(p138)) In Figure 13 it is
demonstrated how the viscosity isokom temperatures
in ternary sodium borosilicate glasses increase upon
replacement of silica by boron oxide. The boron oxide
anomaly involving Li2O and K2O is not represented in
the model in Table 6 at log(η/(Pa s))=12·0 because lim-
ited experimental data for common potassium and
lithium borosilicate glasses are available. However,
from the model at the viscosity level log(η/(Pa s))=6·6
(Table 5) it can be concluded that Li2O, Na2O, and
K2O show comparable influences of the boron oxide
anomaly.
With increasing temperature the boron oxide
anomaly decreases as reported in the literature(81) and
comprehensible through application of the model
considered in this study. Therefore, boron oxide
tends to shorten the temperature–viscosity curve of
soda–lime–silica glasses.
4.4.3. Phosphorus oxide
P2O5 increases the viscosity of silicate glasses as
shown in Figure 7, and the coefficients in Table 5.
The not-mentioned (insignificant) coefficient in Ta-
ble 4 shows that P2O5 does not change the viscosity
isokom at log(η/(Pa s))=1·5 if introduced into a glass
in exchange for silica; i.e. it increases the viscosity
isokom to a similar extent to silica. Especially at low
temperatures P2O5 can cause phase separation and
crystallisation(76 (p 92)) that may significantly alter the
viscosity.
4.4.4. Alumina and other intermediate glass
oxides
Al2O3 strongly increases the viscosity of commercial
glasses, most significantly at low temperatures,
caused by the elimination of nonbridging oxygen
sites. ZrO2 shows a very similar influence on the
viscosity. Other intermediate glass oxides like TiO2
or ZnO increase the viscosity at low temperatures
or have no influence respectively, while at high
temperatures the viscosity is decreased. Some heavy
oxides such as PbO or Bi2O3 have a strong viscos-
ity lowering effect over the full temperature range
because of their high cation polarisability. Further
intermediate oxide influences can be derived from
the coefficients in Tables 4–6. In particular the model
at log(η/(Pa s))=1·5 given in Table 4 contains a large
number of intermediate glass oxides as the source
data including multicomponent glasses for nuclear
waste immobilisation.(25,71)
4.4.5. Alkali and alkaline earth oxides
Alkali and alkaline earth oxides are traditional glass
network modifiers that lead to the formation of non-
bridging oxygen sites. They all decrease the viscosity
in the glass melting range approximately in the order
MgO<CaO<SrO<BaO<K 2O<Na2O<Li2O (strongest
effect). The order may slightly change depending
on the glass composition. Various effects seem to
interfere because, interestingly, alkaline earth oxides
with high atomic weight often decrease the viscos-
ity more than alkaline earth oxides with low atomic
weight, but for alkali oxides this trend is reversed. The
alkaline earth oxides possess the ability to bridge over
two non-bridging oxygen sites at low temperature,
thereby strengthening the network and increasing the
viscosity. MgO can show special properties because
of its partial glass forming abilities at high alkali
concentrations.(34(p134))
It is interesting to note that in binary alkali silicates,
according to the original data(1) and the model in
Table 6 at the viscosity level log(η/(Pa s))=12·0, Li2O
surprisingly does not decrease the viscosity isokoms
as much as Na2O. However, in multicomponent
glasses Li2O has the stronger effect (see Figure 12),
again in agreement with the experimental data in
SciGlass.(1) It is possible that phase separation and
crystallisation in binary lithium silicates(82–83) are the
cause of this behaviour.
One of the most widely studied component inter-
actions in glasses is the mixed alkali effect,(84–86,34 (p 132))
especially for properties based on diffusivity such as
the electrical conductivity. Controversy exists to the
present day about the origin of this effect. The mixed
alkali effect also influences the viscosity. Figure 14 il-
lustrates the observation that at a constant total alkali
concentration ternary mixed alkali silicate glasses
have a lower viscosity than either of the two cor-
responding binary alkali silicates. This effect can be
observed most distinctly at low temperatures, while
in the glass melting range its influence is significantly
reduced. The mixed alkali effect is the cause of the
stronger influence of K2O as compared to Na2O on the
viscosity isokom temperatures in Figures 11 and 12.
As the viscosity at low temperatures is significantly
reduced, and at the same time at high temperatures
not much change occurs, the mixed alkali effect
extends the glass working range. The mixed alkali
effect for viscosity may also be observed at low total
alkali concentrations, as opposed to that for the
electrical conductivity. For example, Leko(87) found a
deep minimum of the viscosity isokom temperatures
at log(η/(Pa s))=10 in ternary mixed alkali glasses
containing 5 mol% Na2O+K2O total, when there was
no mixed alkali effect for the electrical conductivity.
In contrast, Nemilov(88) did not observe a mixed alkali
effect for the viscosity in ternary sodium potassium
silicates below 10 mol% total alkali content.
The mixed alkali effect has a negative (decreasing)
effect on viscosity isokom temperatures. The model
predictions in this study describe this behaviour well,
as demonstrated by Figures 14, 11, and 12. Therefore,
it is all the more surprising that all mixed alkali
coefficients Na2O×K2O, Na2O×Li2O, and K2O×Li2O
in Tables 4–6 are not negative, but positive. This
cannot be explained by linear variable correlation
effects,(32,47–48) because the correlation matrix(45) shows
that all noteworthy correlations are positive and
reduce the values of the mixed alkali coefficients
Na2O×K2O, Na2O×Li2O, and K2O×Li2O.
During the common model fitting technique ap-
plied here(32,47–48) all coefficients are optimised to yield
the simplest result with the maximum R2 value. An
examination of the coefficients in Tables 4–6 shows
that the mixed alkali effect is not obtained through the
coefficients Na2O×K2O, Na2O×Li2O, and K2O×Li2O,
but rather through the coefficients Na2O, (Na2O)2,
(Na2O)3, K2O, (K2O)2, (K2O)3, Li2O, (Li2O)2, and (Li2O)3,
based largely on experimental data from independent
binary alkali silicate systems. The model describes
the viscosity behaviour in binary alkali silicates and
ternary mixed alkali silicates equally well, using
mainly the coefficients for binary alkali silicates.
Therefore, following the logic of the model the
mixed alkali effect for the viscosity is not caused by
alkali–alkali interactions in the first place but mainly
by independent alkali–silica interactions. Alkali–silica
interactions cause small additions of alkali oxide to
pure silica glass to have a relative stronger influence
on the viscosity than large additions. In other words,
the mixed alkali effect is a manifestation of a general
nonlinear composition–viscosity behaviour, well
known in binary alkali silicate glasses.
For additional confirmation of this statement a
simple model was developed, based exclusively
on all available composition–viscosity data for the
binary systems SiO2–Na2O and SiO2–K2O given in the
SciGlass databases(1) listed in Tables 13 and 14. The
derived model is given in Table 15, and the dotted
line in Figure 14 shows its application to the mixed-
alkali system studied by Poole.(72) It is obvious in
Figure 14 that a mixed alkali effect for the viscosity
derives directly from nonlinear composition–viscos-
ity behaviour of independent binary systems, without
alkali–alkali interaction.
Figure 15 shows the nonlinear composition–vis-
cosity behaviour in binary glasses in one of its ex-
treme cases. The experimental data in Figure 15 were
published by Leko et al,(1,89) and they are well accepted
based on comparable values(34 (p 165)) and the structural
model by Avramov et al.(90) The models in this paper
cannot be applied to the high silica glasses shown in
Figure 15; however, in Figure 1 and Tables 13 and 14 it
is also shown that at higher alkali concentrations the
composition–viscosity curves in the binary systems
SiO2–Na2O and SiO2–K2O are nonlinear. Additional
examples of nonlinear composition–property behav-
iour have been provided by Mazurin et al(91) using the
SciGlass database.(1)
The positive coefficients for Na2O×K2O, Na2O×Li2O,
and K2O×Li2O could be caused by interactions be-
tween two different alkali oxide–silica bonding struc-
tures, which have a comparatively weak influence
on the viscosity. On the other hand, the mixed alkali
effect for viscosity is largely based on interactions be-
tween alkali oxides and silica, which have a compara-
tively strong influence on the viscosity, without direct
alkali–alkali interference. Alkali ion interactions in
mixed alkali glasses through ion pair formation can-
not be conclusively verified experi­mentally,(109) which
means the modelling efforts of Lyon, which assume a
theoretical mixed alkali compound Na2K2O2 in glass,
appear unreliable.(14) The fact that mixed alkali glasses
produced at temperatures below Tg by ion exchange
sometimes show a mixed alkali effect for the electrical
conductivity(110) and sometimes do not(111) underscores
the importance of interaction with the major network
former that mainly occurs during heating of those ion
exchanged glasses above Tg.
According to the model, the mixed alkali effect for
viscosity is not a special case that occurs exclusively in
mixed alkali silicate glasses. Many glass components
show nonlinear composition–viscosity trends. The
literature reports mixed alkaline earth(112) (see also
Figure 16), mixed oxide,(110,113) mixed anion,(114) mixed
alkali–water,(115) and mixed glass former(116) effects
that even occur in glasses where nonbridging oxygen
sites are absent.(117) In addition, mixed mobile ion,(118)
and similar effects(86,119) are known for other properties
and quite possibly also occur for viscosity. Naturally,
the mixing effects can only be observed as viscosity
minima or maxima as long as the influences of the
considered components are similar; otherwise, the
strong difference between both influences leads to a
more or less nonlinear composition–viscosity func-
tion without extrema if mixing effects are present.
From the MgO×CaO coefficients in Tables 4–6
it appears that the simultaneous presence of MgO
and CaO in a glass decreases viscosity isokoms,
especially at low temperatures. It is likely that the
negative MgO×CaO coefficients are a manifestation
of a mixed alkaline earth effect that could not be
reduced otherwise to MgO and CaO squared and
cubic terms, based mainly on binary alkaline earth
silicates, because those glasses are difficult or impos-
sible to prepare.
The models in this study do not explain the
cause of the mixed alkali effect for the viscosity and
similar composition–viscosity trends, but they show
that the mixed alkali effect and nonlinear composi-
tion–viscosity trends in binary glasses largely have
the same origin, namely interactions of individual
alkali oxides with glass network formers rather than
interactions between alkali oxides. Details of those
network former–alkali interactions remain the topic
for other research such as that of Avramov et al,(90)
especially with regards to such extreme behaviour
as that seen in Figure 15.
If this hypothesis concerning the mixed alkali ef-
fect for the viscosity holds true, it should not vanish
at low alkali concentrations because at low alkali
concentrations the composition–viscosity behaviour
becomes strongly nonlinear as seen in Figure 15. This
is in agreement with experimental observations on
silicate glasses made by Leko(87) who observed the
mixed alkali effect at 5 mol% total alkali content, and
in disagreement with observations by Nemilov(88) who
did not observe it at 10 mol% total alkali content.
It would be interesting to apply the approach
presented here to the mixed alkali effects of other
properties, especially the electrical conductivity.
For this purpose it needs to be considered that the
mixed alkali effect must have at least two causes with
opposite influence. If only one cause existed (glass
network weakening) then with decreasing viscosity
the conductivity would increase when alkalis are
mixed. However, the mixed alkali effect leads to a
decrease of the electrical conductivity (ion mobility
reduction). Glass network weakening by itself leads
to an improved ion mobility. This contradiction is
recognised but not often discussed or even under-
stood in the literature(84,p260) because the main focus
of mixed alkali research is centred on the electrical
conductivity, i.e. the reduction in ion mobility. With
respect to viscosity the mixed alkali effect appears
to be mainly due to the mixing of two independent
binary systems, in the case of the electrical conductiv-
ity strong alkali–alkali interactions need to be taken
into account. This agrees in principle with Kim et
al,(120) who conclude from their experiments that
the mixed alkali effects for viscosity and electrical
conductivity must be considered separately. It is pos-
sible that the Na2O×K2O, Na2O×Li2O, and K2O×Li2O
interactions in Tables 4–6, that moderately increase
the viscosity, have a strong impeding effect on the
alkali ion mobility. If proven correct, those opposing
causes might be the reason why the mixed alkali
effect for the electrical conductivity is not observed
at low alkali concentrations; i.e. network weakening
and reduction in ion mobility due to alkali–alkali
interactions cancel each other as far as ion mobility
is concerned. In this respect it is beneficial to evaluate
the experimental findings of Ivanov,(121) according to
which the conductivity minimum in mixed alkali
germanate glasses not only disappears at low alkali
concentrations into a linear function, but beyond
this, the curvature slightly reverses from concave to
convex. Accordingly, at very low alkali concentrations
it could be speculated that the mixed alkali effect for
electrical conductivity may reverse if the influence
of the network weakening on the ion mobility is
stronger than the reduction in ion mobility caused
by alkali–alkali interactions.
4.4.6. Anions and water
Fluoride and chloride ions in glass lower the vis-
cosity because of the creation of terminal Si–F and
Si–Cl bonds. Polar molecules such as H2O lower the
viscosity as well, based on dissociation and reaction
with Si–O bonds. The influence of water could not
be detected in this work because of the few available
data and the difficulty of H2O analysis in glass.(122)
However, the viscosity lowering effect of H2O is well
known in the literature.(34(p145),115,123) Also sulfur oxides
and associated anions, expressed commonly as SO3,
decrease the viscosity of glass melts, while in the glass
transition and softening range no influence could be
detected because of the few available data.
5. Conclusions
Models based on multiple regression using poly-
nomial functions for estimating the temperature-
viscosity behaviour of silicate glasses from their
chemical composition have been developed. The
models combine the majority of the published data
relevant to commercial glass production and the
previous models derived from them in unified equa-
tions. The accuracy of prediction could be improved
through an advanced statistical analysis approach,
for example by analysing systematic differences be-
tween laboratories. Detailed error calculations for the
predictions are possible, considering the uncertainty
of the chemical glass composition of interest.(45) The
accuracy of prediction is comparable to measurement
series performed in several laboratories, and it is
superior to the accuracy of a single measurement.
The presented models provide a new approach
to the mixed alkali effect. It has been shown that the
mixed alkali effect for viscosity is largely not caused
by alkali–alkali interactions, but rather by nonlinear
alkali–silica interactions. The mixed alkali effect for
viscosity is not limited to mixed alkali glasses or
alkali oxides, but can occur in any other system
where nonlinear composition–viscosity behaviour
is observed.
Evaporation losses during glass melting have
been demonstrated to influence the viscosity sig-
nificantly.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Oleg V. Mazurin, St. Petersburg,
Russia, for providing a large number of viscosity data
from the SciGlass information system.
References
1. SciGlass 6.5 Database and Information System, 2005. www.sciglass.info
2. Vogel, H. Temperaturabhängigkeitsgesetz der Viskosität von Flüssig-
keiten (Law of Temperature Dependence of Liquids). Phys. Zeitschrift,
1921, 22, 645–6. (In German.)
3. Fulcher, G. S. Analysis of recent measurements of the viscosity of
glasses. J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1925, 8 (6), 339–55.
4. Tammann, G. & Hesse, W. Die abhängigkeit der viskosität von der
temperatur bei unterkühlten flüssigkeiten (Dependence of the vis-
cosity from the temperature in undercooled liquids). Zeitschrift für
Anorganische und Allgemeine Chemie, 1926, 156, 245–57.
5. English, S. The effect of composition on the viscosity of glass. J. Soc.
Glass Technol., 1924, 8, 205–48; 1925, 9, 83–98; 1926, 10, 52–66.
6. Gehlhoff, G. & Thomas, M. Thomas; Zeit. Techn. Phys., 1925, 6, 544;
1926, 7, 105; 1926, 7, 260–78. (In German.)
7. Lakatos, T., Johansson, L.-G. & Simmingsköld, B. Glass Technol. 1972,
13 (3), 88–95; Glastekn. Tidskr., 1972, 27 (2), 25–8; Glastekn. Tidskr., 1973,
28, 75–9; Glastekn. Tidskr., 1975, 30 (1), 7–8; Glastekn. Tidskr., 1976, 31,
31–5; Glastekn. Tidskr., 1976, 31, 51–4; Glastekn. Tidskr., 1977, 32 (2), 31–5;
Glastekn. Tidskr., 1978, 33 (3), 55–9; Glastekn. Tidskr., 1979, 34, 61–5.
8. Okhotin, M. V. Stek. Keram. Promyshlennost, 1947, 3, 12; Steklo Keram.,
1954, 1, 7.
9. Mazurin, O. V., Tretiakova, N. I. & Shvaiko-Shvaikovskaya, T. P. Metod
rascheta viazkosti silikatnykh stekol. Deposited in VINITI, 1969, no.
DEP1091-69.
10. Sasek, L., Meissnerova, H. & Kovandova, J. Application of mathemati-
cal-statistical methods in silicate research. Part 6. Determinations of
mathematical relations for the calculation of the temperature depend-
ence of viscosity in the range of η=107·65–1014 and η=102–1014 d(Pa s)
from chemical composition of the glass. (Orig. Czech); Sb. Vys. Sk.
Chem.-Technol. Praze, Chem. Technol. Silik. 1977, L7, 149–218.
11. Braginskii, K. I. Calculation of the viscosity of glass as a function of
temperature. Glass Ceram., 1973, 30, 451–4.
12. Rodriguez Cuartas, R. Calculo teorico de propriedades del vidro:
viscosidad, parametros termicos y parametros de desvitrification.
(Theoretical calculation of glass properties: viscosity, thermic parame-
ters and parameters of devitrification. Ceram. Vidr., 1984, 23, 105–11.
13. Ledererova, V., Smrcek, A. & Rysavy, J. Faktoren zur berechnung von
eigenschaften von kalk-natrongläsern. (Factors for the calculation of
properties of soda-lime glasses. (Orig. Czech); Sklar Keram., 1986, 36,
304–8.
14. Lyon, K. C. Prediction of the viscosities of soda-lime-silica glasses. J.
Res. Nat. Bur. Standards A, 1974, 78A (4), 497–504.
15. Bottinga, Y. & Weill, D. F. The viscosity of magmatic silicate liquids:
a model for calculation. Am. J. Sci., 1972, 272, 438–75.
16. Herbert, J., Prod’homme, M. & Derobert, M. Viscosity-temperature
relations in the SiO2–Na2O–K2O–Al2O3–B2O3–PbO system in the
composition range of lead crystal glass. Verres Refract., 1976, 30 (2),
219–21.
17. Leko, V. K. Fiz. Khim. Stekla, 1980, 6 (5), 553; Fiz. Khim. Stekla, 1982, 8
(2); Leko, V. K . & Mazurin, O. V. Svoistva Kvartsevogo Stekla. Leningrad,
1985.
18. Urbain, G., Cambier, F., Deletter, M. & Anseau, M. R. Viscosity of
silicate melts. Trans. J. Br. Ceram. Soc., 1981, 80 (4), 139–41.
19. Belousov, Yu. L. & Firsov, V. A. Fiz. Khim. Stekla, 1991, 17 (3), 411.
20. Belousov, Yu. L. & Akulova, M. V. Fiz. Khim. Stekla, 1992, 18 (4), 94;
Pushkareva, M. V. Printsipy i metod rascheta vyazkosti stekol v
shirokom intervale sostavov i temperatur. Thesis, Belgorod, 1993.
21. Kozyukov, V. M. & Mazurin, O. V. Fiz. Khim. Stekla, 1994, 20 (4), 449.
22. Conradt, R. Thermodynamic approach to viscosity in the glass transi-
tion. Glastech. Ber., Glass Sci. Technol., 1994, 67 (11), 304–11.
23. Öksoy, D., Pye, D. L. & Boulos, E. N. Statistical analysis of viscosity-
composition data in glassmaking. Glastech. Ber., Glass Sci. Technol.,
1994, 67 (7), 189–95.
24. Kozyukov,V. M. & Mazurin, O. V. Calculation of viscosity of sodium-
calcium silicate melts. Fiz. Khim. Stekla, 1994, 20 (4), 449–60. (In Rus-
sian.)
25. Hrma, P. R., Piepel, G. F. et al. Property/composition relationships for
Hanford high-level waste glasses melting at 1150°C. PNL Report 10359 to
the US Department of Energy, 1994, 1–2; Vienna, J. D. & Hrma, P. R.
et al. Effect of composition and temperature on the properties of high
level waste (HLW) glass melting above 1200°C (Draft); PNNL Report
10987 to the US Department of Energy, 1996. Hrma, P. & Robertus,
R. J. Waste glass design based on property composition functions.
Ceram. Eng. Sci. Proc., 1993, 14 (11/12), 187–203; Hrma, P., Piepel, G.
F., Redgate, P. E., Smith, D. E., Schweiger, M. J., Vienna, J. D. & Kim,
D. S. Prediction of processing properties for nuclear waste glasses.
Ceram. Trans., 61, 505–13.
26. Björkvall, J., Du Sichen, Stolyarova, V. & Seetharaman, S. A model
description of the thermochemical properties of multicomponent slags
and its application to slag viscosities. Glass Phys. Chem., 2001, 27 (2),
132–47.
27. Korsgaard, M., Pind, M., Moller, P., Sorensen, S. & Woldum, H. S.
Derivation of the temperature dependent constants for KAlO2 and
NaAlO2 in a viscosity predictive model for high aluminosilicate melts.
Glass Sci. Technol., 2003, 76 (6), 270–4.
28. Priven, A. I. General method for calculating the properties of oxide
glasses and glass-forming melts from their composition and tempera-
ture. Glass Technol., 2004, 45 (6), 244–54. Priven, A. I. Calculation of
the viscosity of glass-forming melts. Part 1. The Li2O–Na2O–K2O–SiO2
system. Glass Phys. Chem., 1997, 23 (5), 344–53. Priven, A. I. Calculation
of the viscosity of glass-forming melts. Part 2. The MgO–CaO–SrO–
BaO–Al2O3–SiO2 system.Glass Phys. Chem., 1997, 23 (6), 416–28. Priven,
A. I. Calculation of the viscosity of glass-forming melts. Part 3. The
Alk2O–RO–Al2O3–SiO2 system. Glass Phys. Chem., 1998, 24 (1), 19–30.
Priven, A. I. Calculation of the viscosity of glass-forming melts. Part 4.
A unified method for calculating the viscosity of silicate and aluminate
melts. Glass Phys. Chem., 1998, 24 (1), 31–40. Priven, A. I. Calculation
of the viscosity of glass-forming melts. Part 5. Binary borate Systems.
Glass Phys. Chem., 2000, 26 (6), 541–58. Priven, A. I. Calculation of
the viscosity of glass-forming Melts. Part 6. The R2O–B2O3–SiO2 and
RO–B2O3–SiO2 ternary borosilicate systems. Glass Phys. Chem., 2001, 27
(4), 360–70. Priven, A. I. Calculation of the temperature coefficient of
viscosity logarithm ∂logη/∂logT for oxide melts in the glass transition
range from their composition. Glass Phys. Chem., 2000, 26 (5), 455–69.
Priven, A. I. Comparative characterisation of methods for calculat-
ing the viscosity of silicate glass-forming melts. Glass Phys. Chem.,
1997, 23 (5), 333–43. Priven, A. I. A new equation for describing the
temperature dependence of the viscosity of glass-forming melts. Glass
Phys. Chem., 1999, 25 (6), 491–7. Priven, A. I. Calculation of temperature
dependences of the viscosity and volume relaxation time for oxide
glass-forming melts from chemical composition and dilatometric glass
transition temperature. Glass Phys. Chem., 2001, 27 (6), 527–42.
29. Russell, J. K. & Giordano, D. A model for silicate melt viscosity in the
system CaMgSi2O6–CaAl2Si2O8–NaAlSi3O8. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta,
2005, 69 (22), 5333–49.
30. Fluegel, A., Varshneya, A. K., Seward, T. P. & Earl, D. A. Viscosity of
commercial glasses in the softening range. Proc. Seventh Int. Conf. on
Advances in Fusion and Processing of Glass III. Edited by J. R. Varner, T.
P. Seward, H. Schaeffer, The American Ceramic Society, Westerville,
Ohio, USA. Ceram. Trans., 2004, 141, 379–86.
31. Fluegel, A., Varshneya, A. K., Earl, D. A., Seward, T. P. & Oksoy, D.
Improved composition-oroperty relations in silicate glasses. Part 1.
Viscosity. Ceram. Trans., 2005, 170, 129–43.
32. Fluegel, A.,Earl, D. A., Varshneya, A. K. & Öksoy, D. Statistical analysis
of viscosity, electrical resistivity, and further glass melt properties. High
temperature glass melt property database for process modelling. Edited by T.
P. Seward III & T. Vascott; The American Ceramic Society, Westerville,
Ohio, 2005, Chapter 9.
33. Hrma, P. High-temperature viscosity of commercial glasse. Ceram.
Silikaty, 2006, 50 (2), 57–66.
34. Scholze, H. Glass - nature, structure and properties. Springer-Verlag,
1991, ISBN 0-387-97396-6.
35. Volf, M. B. Mathematical approach to glass. Glass Sci. Technol., 1988,
9.
36. Martlew, D. Viscosity of molten glasses. Properties of Glass-Forming
Melts. Edited by L. D. Pye, A. Montenaro, I. Joseph, CRC Press, Boca
Raton, Florida, 2005, Chapter 5.
37. International Glass Database System INTERGLAD Ver.6; New Glass
Forum, Tokyo, Japan.
38. Hrma, P., See, C. A., Lam, O. P. & Minister, K. B. C. High-temperature
viscosity of commercial glasses. High temperature glass melt property
database for process modelling. Edited by T. P. Seward III & T. Vascott;
The American Ceramic Society, Westerville, Ohio, 2005, Chapter 7.
39. Standard Reference Material 710A, Soda-Lime-Silica Glass. National
Institute of Standards & Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, MD, 20899,
USA, March 20, 1991.
40. Standard Reference Material 717A, Borosilicate Glass. National Institute
of Standards & Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, MD, 20899, USA;
September 18, 1996.
41. Standard Sample No. 711, Certificate of Viscosity Values, Lead-Silica
Glass. National Bureau of Standards, U.S. Department of Commerce,
Washington, D.C., 20235, USA; July 1, 1964.
42. Napolitano, A. & Hawkins, E. G. Viscosity of a standard soda-lime-
silica glass. J. Res. Nat. Bur Stand. A., 1964, 68A (5), 439–48.
43. Meerlender, G. Viskositäts-Temperaturverhalten des Standardglases
I der DGG (DGG - Deutsche Glastechnische Gesellschaft, German
Society of Glass Technology). Glastechn. Ber., 1974, 47 (1), 1–3.
44. Waste Glass Standard, personal communication, publication in prepa-
ration. The Waste Glass Standard was established in Round-Robin
tests with several participating laboratories.
45. Viscosity calculation program, model validity limits, inverse information
and correlation matrices available at http://glassproperties.com/viscosity/
46. Shelby, J. E. High temperature glass melt property database for process
modelling. Edited by T. P. Seward III and T. Vascott, The American
Ceramic Society, Westerville, Ohio, 2005, Appendix I.
47. Fluegel, A., Earl, D. A., Varshneya, A. K. & Seward, T. P. Density and
thermal expansion calculation of silicate glass melts. Proc. CD 79th
Glastechnische Tagung, Wuerzburg, Germany, 23–25 May 2005.
48. Fluegel, A. Statistical regression modelling of glass properties - a
tutorial. Glass Technol., Eur. J. Glass Sci. Technol. A, in press.
49. Allison, R. S. & Turner, W. E. S. Further investigations upon the influ-
ence of boric oxide on the rate of melting of the batch, and on the rate
of refining and of setting of commercial glasses of the soda-lime-silica
type. J. Soc. Glass Technol., 1954, 38, 297–364.
50. Eipeltauer, E. & More, A. Radex-Rundsch., 1960, 4, 230.
51. Eipeltauer, E. & Jangg, G. Kolloid Zh., 1955, 142 (2–3), 77.
52. English, S. & Turner, W. E. S. J. Soc. Glass Technol., 1921, 5, 121–3; J.
Soc. Glass Technol., 1928, 12, 75–81; Turner, W. E. S. & Winks, F. J. Soc.
Glass Technol., 1928, 12, 57–74.
53. Data by J. Kurachi (2003) from the SciGlass Database. Private communi­
cation, O. V. Mazurin.
54. Ota, R. & Fukunaga, J. Advances in Fusion of Glass. American Ceramic
Society, Westerville, Ohio, 1988, 31; Ota, R. & Fukunaga, J. Proc. XVth
Int. Congr. on Glass. Leningrad, 1989, 1a, 162; Ota, R., Tsuchiya, F,
Kawamura, K., Nakanishi, Sh. & Fukunaga, J. J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 1991,
99 (2), 168.
55. Evstropiev, K. S. & Pospelov, B. A. Fiziko-Khimicheskie Svoistva Troinoi
Sistemy Na2O–PbO–SiO2. Moskva, 1949, 70. (In Russian.)
56. Preston, E. Viscosity of soda-silica glasses at high temperatures and its
bearing on their constitution. J. Soc. Glass Technol., 1938, 22, 45–81.
57. Sasek, L., Meissnerova, H. & Hoffmann, O. Sb. Vys. Sk. Chem. Technol.
Praze, Chem. Technol. Silik., 1975, L6, 153; Sasek, L., Meissnerova, H.
& Persin, J. Sb. Vys. Sk. Chem. Technol. Praze, Chem. Technol. Silik., 1973,
L4, 87; Sasek, L., Meissnerova, H. & Hoskova, V. Sb. Vys. Sk. Chem.
Technol. Praze, Chem. Technol. Silik., 1975, L6, 131; Sasek, L., Mika, M.
& Rada, M. Silikaty, 1988, 32 (3), 209; Mika, M. & Piepel, G. F. Ceram.
Silikaty, 1997, 41 (4), 141; Sasek, L. Silikaty, 1963, 7 (4), 270.
58. Shvaiko-Shvaikovskaya, T. P., Mazurin, O. V. & Bashun, Z. S. Neorg.
Mater., 1971, 7 (1), 143; Shvaiko-Shvaikovskaya, T. P., Steklo, 1968, 3, 93;
Shvaiko-Shvaikovskaya, T. P., Gusakova, N. K. & Mazurin, O. V. Neorg.
Mater., 1971, 7 (4), 713., Shvaiko-Shvaikovskaya, T. P., Gusakova, N. K.
& Mazurin, O. V. Vyazkost Stekol Sistemy Na2O–CaO–SiO2 v Shyrokom
Intervale Temperatur. Deposited in VINITI, Moscow, No. 483–71 Dep.,
1971.
59. Tang, Y. & Frischat, G. H. Glastech. Ber., 1990, 63K, 410.; Tang, Y. &
Frischat, G. H. Influence of small additions of Li2O raw materials on
glass melting. Glastechn. Ber., Glass Sci. Technol., 1995, 68 (7), 213.
60. Washburn, E. W., Shelton, G. R. & Libman, E. E. Univ. Ill. Bull., 1924,
21 (S140), 33.
61. Flannery, J. E., Morgan, D. W., Rosplock, S. E. & Sczerbaniewicz, S. A.
US Patent No. 4273586 Cl 3 C 03 C 3/04, Off. Gazette, 1981, 1007 (3).
62. Robinson, H. A. & Peterson, C. A. Viscosity of recent container glass.
J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1944, 27 (5), 129–38.
63. Yue Y. & Brueckner, R. Influence of homologous substitutions of
chemical components on the rheological properties and on isochomal
workability of silicate glass melts. Glastech. Ber., Glass Sci. Technol.,
1996, 69 (7), 204–15; Yue, Y. & Bruckner, R. Glastech. Ber., Glass Sci.
Technol.,1996, 69 (10), 311.
64. Nemilov, S. V. & Ignatjev, A. I. Fiz. Khim. Stekla, 1990, 16 (1), 85; Nemilov,
S. V. Neorg. Mater., 1968, 4 (6), 952; Nemilov, S. V. Zh. Prikl. Khim., 1969,
42 (1), 55.
65. Shelby, J. E. Transformation range viscosity measurements. High
temperature glass melt property database for process modelling. Edited by T.
P. Seward III & T. Vascott, The American Ceramic Society, Westerville,
Ohio (2005), Chapter 7.
66. Fluegel, A. & Varshneya, A. K. Parallel plate viscometry. High tem-
perature glass melt property database for process modelling. Edited by T.
P. Seward III & T. Vascott, The American Ceramic Society, Westerville,
Ohio (2005), Chapter 7.
67. Owens-Illinois Glass Company, General Research Laboratory. Effect
of barium oxide and zinc oxide on the properties of soda-dolomite
lime-silica glass. J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1942, 25 (3), 61–9; Effect of iron
oxide on the properties of soda-dolomite lime-silica glass. J. Am.
Ceram. Soc., 1942, 25 (14), 401–8; Effect of substituting MgO for CaO
on properties of typical soda-lime glasses. J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1944, 27
(8), 221–5; Effect of fluorine and phosphorus pentoxide on properties
of soda-dolomite lime-silica glass. J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1944, 27 (12),
369–72; Properties of soda-strontium oxide-alumina-silica glasses. J.
Am. Ceram. Soc., 1948, 31 (1), 1–8; Effect of boric oxide on properties
of soda-dolomite lime-silica glass. J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1948, 31 (1), p
8–14; Effect of K2O and Li2O on properties of soda-dolomite lime-silica
glasses. J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1950, 33, 181–6.
68. M. Liska, P. Simurka: “Viscosity of the glass forming melts in the
15Na2O, 10(MgO, CaO, TiO2, ZrO2), 75SiO2 system. Phys. Chem.
Glasses, 1995, 36 (1), 6–11; Liska, M., Klyuek, V. P., Antalik, J. & Stubna,
I. Thermodilatometry and structural relaxation of Na2O*2SiO2–
Na2O*2TiO2 glasses, Ceram. Silikaty, 1996, 40 (3), 85–91; Liska, M.,
Klyuev, V. P., Antalik, J. & Stubna, I. Viscosity of Na2O*2(TiO2,SiO2)
glasses. Phys. Chem. Glasses, 1997, 38 (1), 6–10.
69. Skornyakov, M. M. Fiziko-Khimicheskie Svoistva Troinoi Sistemy
Na2O–PbO–SiO2. Moskva, 1949, 39.
70. Erickson, T. D. & Wolf, W. W. US Patent No. 3847626 Cl C 03 C 13/00,
Off.Gazette, 1974, 928 (2). Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp., GB Patent
No.1391384 Cl 2 C 03 C 13/00, 3/04, Abridg.Specif., 1975, No. 4491.
71. Bulkley & Vienna; Plutonium Vitrification, 1997, personal communica-
tion; Feng et al., 1996, Hanford LLW Glass Formulation, personal
communication; McPherson, D. et al. The influence of waste variability
on the properties and phase stability of the West Valley reference glass.
September 1986; Muller, I. S., Buechele, A. C. & Pegg, I. L. Glass
formulation and testing with RPP-WTP LAW simulants. VSL-01R3560-2,
2001; Muller, I. S. & Pegg, I. L. Glass formulation and testing with
TWRS LAW simulants. January 1998; Olson, K. M. Fabrication and
leaching of West Valley demonstration project glasses: ten quarter 2 and
ten quarter 3 glasses. October 1993; Olson, K. M. Viscosity testing of 30
WVDP glasses. February 1994; Staples, B. A., Scholes, B. A., Peeler, D. K.,
Torres, L. L., Vienna, J. D., Musick, C. A. & Boyle, B. R. The preparation
and characterisation of INTEC HAW phase 1 composition variation study
glasses. INEEL/EXT-98-00970, March 1999; Staples, B. A., Scholes, B.
A., Peeler, D. K., Torres, L. L., Vienna, J. D., Musick, C. A. & Boyle,
B. R. The preparation and characterisation of INTEC phase 2b composition
variation study glasses. INEEL/EXT-99-01322, February 2000. Vienna,
J. D. et al. 2002, SBW Melter Glass Formulation, personal communica-
tion.
Poole, J. P. & Gensamer, M. Systematic study of effect of oxide constitu-
ents on viscosity of silicate glasses at annealing temperatures. J. Am.
Ceram. Soc., 1949, 32 (7), 220–9; Poole, J. P. Low-temperature viscosity
of alkali silicate glasses. J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1949, 32 (7), 230–3.
Akimov, V. V. Viscosity of sodium borosilicate glasses in the glass
transition range.The Sov. J. Glass Phys. Chem., (Fiz. Khim. Stekla,) 1991,
17 (4), 348; (5), 425.
Phase separation in glass. Edited by O. V. Mazurin & E. A. Porai-Koshits,
Elsevier Science Publishers B. V., North-Holland; Amsterdam, New
York, 1984.
Fluegel, A. Untersuchungen zur Herstellung von Porengröße-Gradienten
in Kieselglas auf der Grundlage entmischter Natriumborosilicat-Gläser (Pore
Size Gradients in Silica Glass based on Phase-Separated Sodium Borosilicate
Glasses). Dissertation, Jena, Germany, 1999. (In German.); Fluegel, A. &
Ruessel, C. Kinetics of phase separation in a 6·5Na2O–33·5B2O3–60SiO2
glass. Glass Sci. Technol., 2000, 73 (3), 73–8.
Vogel, W. Glass Chemistry. Springer-Verlag, 1994, Second Edition.
Haller, W., Blackburn, D. H., Wagstaff, F. E. & Charles, R. J. Metastable
immiscibility surface in the system Na2O–B2O3–SiO2. J. Am. Ceram.
Soc., 1970, 53, 34–9.
Polyakova, I. G. The regularities of the metastable immiscibility in the
Na2O–B2O3–SiO2 system: lower and upper temperature boundaries.
Glass Phys. Chem., 1997, 23, 45–57.
Fernandes, M. H. V. & Cable, M. Reactive vaporisation of sodium
tetraborate with water vapour. Glass Technol., 1993, 34 (1), 26–32.
Saringyulyan, R. S. Value reported in the SciGlass database, code 3561,
GNo. 22935, 1970.
Shartsis, L., Capps, W. & Spinner, S. Viscosity and electrical resistivity
of molten alkali borates. J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1953, 36, 319–26.
Gruner, K., Koltermann, M. & Mueller, K. P. Quarzbildung und
Kristallisation aus binaeren Lithiumsilicatschmelzen und -glaesern”
(Quartz formation and crystallisation of binary lithium silicate melts
and glasses); Glastech. Ber., 1967, 40 (5), 185–94. (In German.)
Ahmed, A. A., El-Batal, H. A., Ghoneim, N. A. & Khalifa, F. A. Leach-
ing of some lithium silicate glasses and glass-ceramics by HCl. J.
Non-Cryst. Solids, 1980, 41 (1), 57–70.
Isard, J. O. The mixed alkali effect in glass. J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1969,
1 (3), 235–61.
Day, D. E. Mixed alkali glasses - their properties and uses. J. Non-Cryst.
Solids, 1976, 21 (3), 343–72.
LaCourse, W. C. & Cormack, A. N. Structural influences on the mixed
alkali effect in glasses. Trans. Am. Crystallogr. Assoc., 1991, 27, 211–24
(Proc. Symp. The Structural Chemistry of Silicates, 22–24 Jul. 1991, Toledo,
OH, USA).
Leko, V. K. Inorg. Mater., 1967, 3, 1645.
Nemilov, S. U. Zh. Prikl. Kim. (Leningrad), 1969, 42, 55.
Leko, V. K., Gusakova, N. K., Meshcheryakova, E. V. & Prokhorova,
T. I. The effect of impurity alkali oxides, hydroxyl groups, Al2O3, and
Ga2O3 on the viscosity of vitreous silica. Glass Phys. Chem., 1977, 3
(3), 204–19; Leko, V. K., Meshcheryakova, E. V., Gusakova, N. K. &
Lebedeva, R. B. Opt. Mekh. Prom., 1974, 12, 42.
Avramov, I., Rüssel, C. & Keding, R. Effect of chemical composition
on viscosity of oxide glasses. J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2003, 324, 29–35.
Mazurin, O. V. & Gankin, Yu. About testing the reliability of glass
property data in binary systems. J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2004, 342, 166–9.
Mazurin, O. V. & Gankin, Yu. Determination of the most reliable glass
property values by the SciGlass information system. Proc. CD XX Int.
Congr. on Glass, Kyoto, Japan, 27 Sept.–1 Oct. 2004. Mazurin, O. V.
Glass properties: compilation, evaluation, and prediction. J. Non-Cryst.
Solids, 2005, 351, 12–13, 1103–12.
Data by M. Liska and V. P. Klyuev from the SciGlass Database, private
communication, O. V. Mazurin.
Data by O. V. Mazurin from the SciGlass Database, private communica-
tion.
Taylor, N. W. & Dear, P. S. J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1937, 20 (9), 296.
Lee, S.-K., Tatsumisago, M. & Minami, T. J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 1993, 101
(9), 1018.
96. Schnaus, U. E., Schroeder, J. & Haus, J. W. Phys. Lett. A, 1976, 57 (1), 92.
97. El-Badry, Kh. & Ghoneim, N. A. Glastechn. Ber., 1983, 56K (2), 975;
El-Badry, Kh. & Ghoneim, N. A. Cent. Glass Ceram. Res. Inst. Bull.,
1982, 29 (3), 72.
98. Jenckel, E. & Schwittman, A. Glastechn. Ber., 1938, 16 (5), 163.
99. Stolyar, S. V. & Besedina, S. A. Fiz.Khim. Stekla, 1992, 18 (3), 88.
100. Ehrt, D., Leister, M., Matthai, A., Ruessel, C. & Breitbarth, F. Proc.
Fourth Int. Conf. Fundamentals of Glass Science and Technology, Sweden,
1997, 204.
101. Ammar, M. M., El-Badry, Kh. & Gharib, S. Egypt. J. Phys., 1977, 8 (1),
1.
102. Data by Kanchieva from the SciGlass Database. private communica-
tion, O. V. Mazurin.
103. Evstropiev, K. S. Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 1940, 4 (4), 616.
104. Plumat, E. Silicates Ind., 1956, 21 ( 10), 391.
105. Ivanov, O. G., Tretjakova, N. I. & Mazurin, O. V. Steklo Keram., 1969, 7,
42; Tretjakova, N. I. & Mazurin, O. V. Vliyanie Okislov Dvukhvalentnykh
Metallov na Vyzakost Prostykh Silikatnykh Stekol. Deposited in VINITI,
moscow, No. 995-69 Dep., 1969.
106. Data by P. Jarry from the SciGlass Database, private communication,
O. V. Mazurin.
107. Taylor, T. D. & Rindone, G. E. J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1970, 53 (12), 692.
108. Hoffmann, L. C., Kupinski, T. A., Thakur, R. L. & Weyl, W. A. J. Soc.
Glass Technol., 1952, 36, 196–216.
109. Hanson, C. D. & Egami, T. Distribution of Cs+ ions in single and
mixed alkali silicate glasses from energy dispersive x-ray diffraction.
J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1986, 87 (1–2), 171–84.
110. Berg, G. & Ludwig, A. Mixed oxide effect in an ion-exchanged glass.
J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1994, 170 (1), 109–11.
111. Tomandl, G. & Schaeffer, H. A. The mixed-alkali effect - a permanent
challenge. J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1985, 73, 179–96. Tomandl, G. & Schaef-
fer, H. A. Non-Crystalline Solids. Edited by G. H. Frischat, Trans Tech
Publications, Bay Village, Ohio, 1977, 480.
112. Kim, K.-D. & Hwang, J.-H. Influence of BaO/(SrO+BaO) on some
thermal properties of R2O–RO–SiO2 glasses for plasma display panel
substrate. Glastech. Ber., Glass Sci. Technol, 1999, 72 (12), 393–7.
113. Waesche, R. & Brueckner, R. Tg, ultraviolet-transparency and mixed
oxide effect of ultrapure ternary alkaline earth-metaphosphate glasses.
J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1989, 107 (2–3), 309–15.
114. Shelby, J. E. & Ortolano, R. L. Properties and structure of NaF–Na2O–
B2O3 glasses. Phys. Chem. Glasses, 1990, 31 (1), 25–9.
115. Shelby, J. E. & McVay, G. L. Influence of water on the viscosity and
thermal expansion of sodium trisilicate glasses. J. Non-Cryst. Solids,
1976, 20 (3), 439–49.
116. Prasad, P. S. S., Rani, A. N. D. & Radhakrishna, S. Mixed glass former
effect in AgI–Ag2O–V2O5–P2O5 quaternary amorphous solid electro-
lytes. Mater. Chem. Phys., 1990, 25 (5), 487–99.
117. Lapp, J. C. & Shelby, J. E. The mixed alkali effect in sodium and potas-
sium galliosilicate glasses. Part 1. Glass transformation temperatures.
J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1986, 84 (1–3), 463–7. Lapp, J. C. & Shelby, J. E.
The mixed alkali effect in sodium and potassium galliosilicate glasses.
Part 2. DC electrical conductivity. J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1986, 86 (3),
350–60.
118. Ghosh, S. & Ghosh, A. Ion dynamics and mixed mobile ion effect in
fluoride glasses. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97 (12), 123525.
119. Brook, H. C., Chadwick, A. V., Mosslemans, J. F. W. & Greaves, G.
N. EXAFS study of a ‘mixed-alkali’ type effect in sodium-calcium
borate glass. Rad. Effects Defects Solids, 1999,150 (1–4 pt. 2), 795/403–
799/407.
120. Kim, K.-D. & Lee, S.-H. Viscosity behaviour and mixed alkali effect of
alkali aluminosilicate glass melts. J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 1997, 105 (1226),
827–32.
121. Ivanov, A. O. Sov. Phys.-Solid State, 1964, 5, 1933. Data also reported
by Isard.
122. Shelby, J. E. Handbook of Gas Diffusion in Solids and Melts. ASM
International, ISBN: 0871705664, 1996.
123. Gonzalez-Oliver, C. J. R., Johnson, P. S. & James, P. F. Influence of water
content on the rates of crystal nucleation and growth in lithia-silica
and soda-lime-silica glasses. J. Mater. Sci., 1979, 14 (5), 1159.

------------------

Tables:

Table 1. Compositions in mol% of glasses for melting point predictions in Table 2

take data from file ./Fluegel_table1.csv

Table 2. Predictions from several models of glass melting point and experimental results; the values in parentheses were
calculated by slightly exceeding the model validity limits, as is often practiced
take data from file ./Fluegel_table2.csv


(a) unusual predictions caused by the unrealistic coefficients for Fe2O3, TiO2, and SO3
(b) neglecting Fe2O3, TiO2, and SO3
(c) counting K2O as Na2O because the model is not valid for glasses containing K2O
(d) local model for soda–lime container glasses
(e) global model for various commercial glasses



Table 3. Concentration maxima (mol%) for the source data used in modelling
take data from file ./Fluegel_table3.csv


Table 4. Coefficients and t-values at log(η/(Pa s))=1.5
take data from file ./Fluegel_table4.csv


Table 5. Coefficients and t-values at log(η/(Pa s))=6.6
take data from file ./Fluegel_table5.csv

Table 6. Coefficients and t-values at log(η/(Pa s))=12
take data from file ./Fluegel_table6.csv

Table 12. Agreement between viscosity standards and model predictions
take data from file ./Fluegel_table12.csv
* The glass composition is outside the model validity limits.

